<<<PAGE_1>>>
Om Gam Ganapataye Namah Om Rishibhyo Namah Om Sree Gu rubhyo Namah 
Introducing Pushya-paksha Ayanamsa 
P.V.R. Narasimha Rao 
December 31, 2013 (version 1) 
Warning : All copyrights are reserved with author. This article cannot be reproduced in any form in part or in 
full, without express permission from the author. 
Introduction 
The issue of ayanamsa has vexed astrologers followi ng the sidereal system for a long time. There are m any 
popular ayanamsas and yet there is no conclusive  proof, or evidence otherwise, for any of them. 
An ayanamsa deduced based on Surya Siddhanta and so me philosophical rationalization enabled the author  to 
discover  some  objective  astrological  principles.  It  will  be shared  with  in terested  scholars  and  students  of 
astrology in this write-up. 
Several other write-ups illustrating astrological p rinciples that work nicely with this ayanamsa will be shared at 
http://www.VedicAstrologer.org/articles  in coming weeks, months and years. 
Tropical vs Sidereal Zodiacs 
Sun's transit through tropical zodiac brings season s and is associated with observable phenomena. For example, 
entry of Sun into tropical Aries is always aligned with spring equinox (when daytime and night time ar e of 
equal duration) and Sun's entry to tropical Cancer is always  aligned with summer solstice (when daytim e 
duration reaches a maximum). Tropical zodiac is tie d to seasons and can be reliably fixed based on obs ervable 
phenomena. Thus, some cultures started using it in astrology. 
However, zodiacal signs are supposed to be aligned to nakshatras, which correspond to constellations of stars in 
the sky. For example, the sign of Aries should cont ain Aswini nakshatra, Bharani nakshatra and a part of 
Krittika nakshatra.  If  we use the tropical  zodiac, signs  will slowly shift with time and point  to diff erent 
nakshatras in different eras. This is totally inconsistent with the teachings of rishis. 
Unfortunately, we have no observable phenomena base d on which we can conclude that so and so point in the 
zodiac is the start of sidereal Aries. All we know is that sidereal Aries should contain certain const ellations, 
sidereal Taurus should contain certain constellatio ns and so on. So we know approximately where in the  sky 
sidereal Aries falls. But the precise point where Aries starts is not known! 
Ayanamsa 
Ayanamsa is the angle between the start of Aries in  tropical zodiac and the start of Aries in sidereal  zodiac. 
Different  parts  of  India  got  used  to  different  ayan amsas  over  centuries,  differing  by  upto  5-6  degrees ! 
Standardization of Lahiri ayanamsa by Lahiri commission formed by Indian government led to some uniformity 
over the last few decades, but still Vedic astrologers use many ayanamsas differing by a few degrees. 
Yogataras & Anchor Star 

<<<PAGE_2>>>
In each constellation (nakshatra), Surya Siddhanta identified one specific star  as the “yogatara” and  gave its 
exact sidereal longitude and latitude (latitude is the angle from the zodiacal plane or the plane of ecliptic, i.e.  the 
plane in which earth rotates around Sun). As stars themselves are not completely fixed, these longitud es and 
latitudes of stars do change with time. So we canno t take the longitudes and latitudes given by Surya Siddhanta 
as absolute. 
However, if one particular star is the anchor for the zodiac and remains fixed, then the co-ordin ates given for 
that  star by Surya Siddhanta must be valid always . Longitudes and latitudes of other stars may chang e slightly, 
but that star will remain fixed. 
Chitrapaksha Ayanamsa 
Chitrapaksha ayanamsa, popularly known as Lahiri  ay anamsa,  takes Chitra nakshatra as the anchor of the  
zodiac. As per Surya Siddhanta, the yogatara of Chi tra nakshatra is the brightest star in the constell ation and its 
longitude is 180 ° from the start of Aries and its latitude is 2° sout h of the ecliptic plane. Spica (Alpha Virgonis) 
is the brightest star in the constellation correspo nding to Chitra nakshatra. Thus Chitrapaksha ayanam sa fixes 
the start of Aries such that Spica is always at 0Li0. 
Traditional Lahiri ayanamsa is based on an approxim ate linear formula, but modern software programs (s uch as 
“Jagannatha Hora”, freely downloadable from http://www.VedicAstrologer.org ) compute the tropical position 
of Spica accurately at any given time and fix the s tart of sidereal Aries exactly 180° behind it, so t hat the 
sidereal longitude of Spica is always exactly 0Li0.
Drawbacks of Chitrapaksha Ayanamsa 
As per Surya Siddhanta, latitude of the yogatara of  Chitra nakshatra is 2° south of the ecliptic plane . However, 
Spica is 1° south of the ecliptic plane right now. So it does not anyway satisfy the specifications of  Surya 
Siddhanta. 
Secondly, some other respected siddhantas give diff erent longtidue for the yogatara of Chitra nakshatr a. For 
example,  Pitamaha  Siddhanta,  Brahmagupta  Siddhata,  Siddhanta  Sekhara,  Siddhanta  Siromani  and  Graha 
Laghava mention it at 3Li0 and Maha Siddhanta at 2Li50. 
Different siddhantas may approximate planetary moti on differently and their calculations may differ; b ut, the 
zodiac should be the same. Unless a siddhanta is gr ossly incorrect or too approximate, it should atlea st get the 
longitude of the anchor star of the zodiac correct (longitudes of other stars are variable and may hav e different 
values depending on the era when a siddhanta was written). 
Thirdly, there is no philosophical or esoteric just ification for why Chitra nakshatra, whose deity is Tvashta, 
should be the anchor of the zodiac. Possibly, Lahiri commission searched for a bright star near the st art of Aries 
and went for the start of Libra  when they found none near the start of Aries. 
One more point is worth noting. Though people speak  of “fixing” Spica at 0Li0, we actually can not  fix Spica 
there, for it does not even lie on the ecliptic pla ne or the zodiacal plane! We can merely fix the projection of 
Spica onto the zodiacal plane, at 0Li0! 
A star that lies right on the zodiacal plane is a better candidate for being the “anchor” of the 
zodiac, than a star that needs to be projected onto  the plane. After all, you want a ship's anchor 
to be on the ship itself and don't take an object in a helicopter overhead and use its projection on 
the ship as the ship's anchor! ☺

<<<PAGE_3>>>
Other Attempts 
There have been attempts by some scholars in recent  years to take some other nakshatras as the anchor of the 
zodiac. 
For example, some speculated that Moola nakshatra i s the Mooladhara chakra of Kala Purusha and fixed t he 
yogatara of Moola at 0Sg0. There are 3 problems with this: 
(1) The longitude of the yogatara of Moola is not 0Sg0 as per Surya Siddhanta. It is 1Sg0. 
(2) As per Surya Siddhanta, latitude of the yogatara  of Moola is 9° south of the ecliptic plane. Howeve r, 
Shaula (Lambda Scorpii) taken by them as the yogata ra of Moola nakshatra is 12° south of the ecliptic 
plane. 
(3) Sc is the guhya of Kala Purusha and Sg is his th ighs, as per Pararsara. Thus, 0Sg0 is the groin are a 
where thighs start. That is not the location of Mooladhara chakra. 
(4) Again, Shaula is also not on the zodiacal plane.  It is 12° south of it. It is not ideal to consider  an anchor 
that is not even on the plane. 
This author attempted to use the yogataras of sever al nakshatras,  e.g.  Jyeshtha nakshatra owned by Indra, 
Rohini nakshatra owned by Parajapati  etc . However, these experiments did not give rise to a ny consistent 
objective principles. Moreover, none of them had anchor stars right on the zodiacal plane. 
Cancer and Pushya 
Philosophically speaking, the anchor to one's exist ence is not in one's Mooladhara chakra at the base of the 
spine; it is not in one's Ajna chakra in the forehe ad; and, it is not even in one's Sahasrara chakra a t the top of 
head. As per scriptures, the anchor to one's existe nce is in the spark of divinity that lies within th e cave of one's 
heart !
The zodiacal sign of Cancer is the heart of Kala Pu rusha according to Parasara. So the anchor of the z odiac 
must be associated with Cancer, which contains the stars of Pushya, Aslesha and a quarter of Punarvasu. 
Cancer is also known as the sign of Creation. Lord Krishna taught in Srimad Bhagavatam that the next S atya 
yuga will commence when Sun, Moon and Jupiter precisely conjoin with Pushya nakshatra  (presumably with 
the yogatara of Pushya nakshatra). Thus, there is s omething special about Pushya, which makes it the anchor 
for yuga cycle  itself! 
As per Surya Siddhanta, the yogatara of Pushya is s upposed to be at a latitude of 0°, i.e.  right on the zodiacal 
plane . That makes it a good candidate for being the anch or. Though there are a few stars close to  the zodiacal 
plane, there are very few stars right on it! One of them is the yogatara of Pushya. 
If one considers  Surya Siddhanta, Brahma Siddhanta, Soma Siddhanta, Vriddha Vasishtha Siddhanta, 
Pitamaha  Siddhanta,  Maha  Siddhanta,  Brahmagupta  Sid dhanta,  Siddhanta  Sekhara,  Siddhanta 
Siromani  and  Graha  Laghava,  they  give  different  values  for  the  lontidues  of  the  yogataras  of  several 
nakshatras. For example, Pitamaha Siddhanta, Brahma gupta Siddhata, Siddhanta Sekhara, Siddhanta Siroma ni 
and Graha Laghava give the yogatara of Chitra naksh atra at 3Li0 and Maha Siddhanta at 2Li50, while oth ers 
give it at 0Li0 (which is what Lahiri ayanamsa uses). 
But all of the above siddhantas agree on 16Cn0 as the longitude of the yogatara of Pushya nakshatra! 

<<<PAGE_4>>>
Different siddhantas may approximate planetary moti on differently and their calculations may differ; b ut, the 
zodiac should be the same. Unless a siddhanta is gr ossly incorrect or too approximate, it should atlea st get the 
longitude of the anchor star of the zodiac correct. Though the above siddhantas give different values for the 
longitude of the yogatara of Chitra and other naksh atras, they all agree on the longitude of the yogat ara of 
Pushya nakshatra! 
The deity of Pushya is Brihaspati (Jupiter), who is  the greatest giver of stability. Pushya can fix/st abilize the 
zodiacal plane in the skies,  just as Brihaspati st abilizes the throne of Indra in heavens and prevent s it from 
shaking. Just as Jupiter (standing for dheeshakti i.e.  1 st  house) stabilizes Indra's throne (10 th  house), Pushya in 
Cancer stabilizes the starting point of Aries in the 10 th  house from it. 1
Pushya means “the best or topmost one”. In ancient Zoroastrian scripture “Avesta”, Tishtrya (which sou nds like 
Tishya, the Vedic name of Pushya) is the chief star  in the heavens. In addition, when 27 Sun-Moon yoga s are 
defined in panchanga, Pushya is used as the seed star. 
Considering all these factors, it makes great logic al and philosophical sense to take Pushya ( i.e.  its yogatara) as 
the anchor of the zodiac, rather than Chitra nakshatra. 
Pushya-paksha Ayanamsa 
As per Surya Siddhanta, yogatara of Pushya is the star at the centre of the constellation and it is at a longitude of 
16Cn0 and a latitude of 0°.
In Cancer constellation, Delta Cancri (Asellus Aust ralis) is at the centre and it is indeed right on t he ecliptic 
plane, i.e.  at a latitude of 0°! 
So we define Pushya-paksha ayanamsa by fixing the sidereal longitude of Delta Cancri at 16Cn0. It is derived at 
any date/time as follows: 
(1) Take the tropical longitude of Delta Cancri star at the desired date/time. 
(2) Subtract 106° (16Cn0) from it. 
(3) The result is the ayanamsa of the date/time. If we subtract this value from the tropical longitudes  of 
planets (or other bodies/points), we will get their sidereal longitudes at that date/time. 
Reference Values 
For reference, here are its values on some dates: 
500 January 1 (6 am IST): 1° 49´ 9.20´´ (using extra polated Julian calendar) 
1700 January 1 (6 am IST): 18° 31´ 49.71´´ 
1800 January 1 (6 am IST): 19° 55´ 37.30´´ 
1900 January 1 (6 am IST): 21° 19´ 27.11´´ 
2000 January 1 (6 am IST): 22° 43´ 19.12´´ 
2014 January 1 (6 am IST): 22° 55´ 3.87´´ 
2100 January 1 (6 am IST): 24° 7´ 13.48´´ 
2200 January 1 (6 am IST): 25° 31´ 9.91´´ 
2300 January 1 (6 am IST): 26° 55´ 8.55´´ 
3000 January 1 (6 am IST): 36° 44´ 0.98´´ 
1I would like to thank Pt Sanjay Rath for suggesting this philosophical justifcation. 

<<<PAGE_5>>>
“Jagannatha  Hora”  software  available  for  a  free  dow nload  at  http://www.VedicAstrologer.org/jh  supports 
Pushya-paksha ayanamsa in versions 7.65 and higher.  It finds ayanamsa at any given time by finding the  exact 
tropical longitude of Delta Cancri star and does not approximate with any linear formula. 
Subjective Objection 
Some astrologers may object saying that so many ast rologers use Lahiri ayanamsa and they cannot be wro ng. 
Three points should be noted: 
(1) Not  everyone  uses  Lahiri  ayanamsa.  Many  follower s  of  Krishnamoorthy  Paddhati  (KP)  use 
Krishnamoorthy ayanamsa. Some use Raman ayanamsa. S ome use a linear ayanamsa based on Surya 
Siddhanta (which is close to Raman ayanamsa). There  are several popular ayanamsas other than Lahiri 
ayanamsa.  Followers  of  various  ayanamsas  make  good  predictions  and  are  “convinced”  that  their 
ayanamsa is correct. 
(2) Most astrologers use the rasi chart mainly, whic h is less sensitive to ayanamsa. Even those who sta rted 
using divisional charts in the last few decades mer ely pay a lip service to divisional charts and rely on 
rasi chart for most practical purposes. 
They see things in rasi chart and then “confirm” th em from divisional charts, which they say can not 
“over-rule” the rasi chart. That may be called “lip  service”. Their lack of confidence in divisional charts 
could be because their calculations are not reliable enough for divisional charts! 
(3) Ayanamsa  becomes  relevant  if  one  relies  on  divis ional  charts.  However,  several  divisional  chart 
definitions used by astrologers today are suspicious and based on an incorrect interpretation of Parasara. 
For example, see the write-up “Correct Siddhamsa Ch art of Parasara” on the definition of the D-24 char t 
used for education, at http://www.vedicastrologer.org/articles . Today's astrologers map 24 parts of odd 
signs to Le → Cn and 24 parts of even signs to Cn → Ge. This is structurally absurd. For even signs, it  
should  go  anti-zodiacally,  i.e.  Cn → Le  instead  of  Cn → Ge .  Parasara  is  clear,  but  translators 
misinterpreted him and made silly errors. 
With such gross errors in definitions and with a wr ong ayanamsa, no wonder even people who want to 
rely on divisional charts end up paying mere lip se rvice to them! Bottomline is that several reforms a re 
needed in Vedic astrology and they are inter-dependent. 
In light of the current state of affairs w.r.t. tec hniques requiring precision of computations, the ar gument 
“I am so successful that my ayanamsa must be correc t” holds no water. Bottomline is that many people 
using contradictory calculations are successful usi ng techniques relying more on intuition and less on  
precise calculations! But that does not  settle the issue of ayanamsa. 
By the way, Pushya-paksha ayanamsa is very close to  the linear Surya Siddhanta ayanamsa used by 
many traditional astrologers and also to Raman ayanamsa.  In terms of predictive success, Dr BV Raman 
is perhaps the most successful among the famous ast rologers of the last century or two. So predictive 
success of any astrologers using Lahiri ayanamsa cannot be held against Pushya-paksha ayanamsa. 
Does Pushya-paksha Ayanamsa Work 
Write-ups illustrating astroloogical principles fou nd to work well with Pushya-paksha ayanamsa will be  shared 
at http://www.VedicAstrologer.org/articles  in coming weeks, months and years. For starters, o ne may consider 
reading a write-up titled “ Two Novel Transit Principles: Based on Longitude Correlations ”. 
This author's primary interest is in objective tech niques and techniques requiring precision of calcul ations. 
Thus, most of his findings and sharings will be in that area. 

<<<PAGE_6>>>
It is hoped that astrology students and researchers  will use this ayanamsa to conduct researches and d iscover 
missing links in our understanding of predictive astrological principles that require precise calculations. 
A few things to keep in mind are: 
(1) If one uses mainly rasi chart, ayanamsa does not  matter that much. Though it can change chara karak as, 
people do not have precise methods of using them an yway. Though it can change the nakshatra dasa 
dates, those dates are quite sensitive to birthtime and unreliable anyway. 
(2) Divisional charts, especially the higher ones, c an be sensitive to ayanamsa changes. But definition s of 
several divisional charts are suspect. One needs to  use the correct definitions. This author's views o n the 
definitions of various divisional charts will be shared in other write-ups. 
(3) Though rishis taught several dasa systems, peopl e always use 1 or 2 dasas. One probably needs to us e 
the  correct  dasa,  correct  divisional  chart  and  corr ect  ayanamsa,  in  order  to  see  some  excellent 
correlations. Perhaps even a single missing link can muddy the results! 
(4) Thumb rules people develop in practice may not b e reliable. Learning the correct knowledge may 
sometimes require un-learning wrong knowledge. One needs to be open-minded and intellectually sharp 
and alert. 
Please feel free to experiment with this ayanamsa a nd with principles described in other write-ups her e and also 
to share the website link with your friends and colleagues interested in Vedic astrology. 
::Om Shaantih Shaantih Shaantih:: 