<<<PAGE_1>>>
Om Gam Ganapataye Namah Om Rishibhyo Namah Om Sree Gu rubhyo Namah 
Unified Nakshatra Dasa Approach: 
In Annual & Natal Charts 
P.V.R. Narasimha Rao 
January 7, 2014 (version 4) 
December 31, 2013 (version 1) 
Warning : All copyrights are reserved with author. This article cannot be reproduced in any form in part or in 
full, without express permission from the author. 
Introduction 
Maharshi Parasara taught nine conditional nakshatra  dasas after teaching Vimsottari dasa. Each dasa ha s a 
condition of applicability. For example, Shodasotta ri dasa applies if birth occurs in Sun's hora in Su kla paksha 
or in Moon's hora in Krishna paksha, i.e.  it applies in 50% charts. Dwisaptati sama dasa app lies if lagna lord is 
in 7 th  house or 7 th  lord is in lagna, i.e.  it applies in 16.67% charts. Different conditional  nakshatra dasas apply 
under different conditions and the applicability ra te varies from 8.33% to 50%. There are  three  conditional 
nakshatra dasas that apply in 50% charts. These das as obviously have an overlap,  i.e.  several dasas may be 
applicable in the same chart. On top of all these d asas, of course, Vimsottari dasa is considered the most 
important nakshatra dasa. The obvious question: How can we pick the best dasa in a chart? 
Some people use rarer conditional dasas when they are applicable, but ignore 3 common conditional dasas with 
50% applicability rate. That does not make sense – why did Parasara teach them if they are not useful?  One 
more consideration: If we always prefer a condition al nakshatra dasa to Vimsottari dasa when atleast o ne of 
them is applicable, then we will very rarely end up  using Vimsottari dasa. That does not make sense ei ther, for 
Parasara taught that Vimsottari dasa is the most important dasa. 
Bottomline is that Parasara did not explicitly teac h how to priorotize Vimsottari dasa and conditional  nakshatra 
dasas that may be simultaneously applicable. So the  whole methodology of conditional nakshatra dasas i s laden 
with confusions. 
A methodology  deduced  from Parasara's teachings, for picking  one  dasa in any chart from among 
Vimsottari dasa and nine conditional nakshatra dasa s, is proposed in this write-up. This methodology 
seems to work well in natal charts as well as annua l Tithi Pravesha charts. In fact, it works better i n 
annual Tithi Pravesha charts. 
Pushya-paksha Ayanamsa 
A new ayanamsa called “Pushya-paksha ayanamsa” enab led the discovery shared in this article. Please re ad the 
write-up  titled  “Introducing  Pushya-paksha  Ayanamsa ”  at  http://www.VedicAstrologer.org/articles  before 
reading this write-up. It will explain the definition as well as the rationale behind Pushya-paksha ayanamsa. 
Replicating Calculations 

<<<PAGE_2>>>
You can download “Jagannatha Hora” software from  http://www.VedicAstrologer.org/jh  and select Pushya- 
paksha ayanamsa. In addition, you will need to set some divisional chart calculation options to follow  this 
write-up. Some divisional charts are computed incorrectly by people now-a-days. 
For example, when computing siddhamsa (D-24) chart used for seeing education, today's astrologers map 24 
parts of odd signs to Le → Cn and 24 parts of even signs to Cn → Ge. This is structurally absurd. For even signs, 
it should go  anti-zodiacally,  i.e.  Cn → Le , instead  of Cn → Ge . Parasara  is absolutely clear,  but translators 
misinterpreted him. This author identified such err ors in various divisional charts and corrected them  after 
experimentation. 
In  the main menu of “Jagannatha  Hora”  software (ver sion  7.65 or higher),  you  can  select  “Preferences”,  
“Related to Calculations” and “Set Calculation Opti ons as recommended by author”, to set divisional ch art 
calculations as used in this write-up. 
Conditional Nakshatra Dasa Methodology 
Controlling Planet 
As pointed out earlier, we will almost never get to  use Vimsottari dasa, if we say that a conditional dasa 
overrides Vimsottari dasa whenever its condition is  satisfied. So we conclude that the conditions give n by 
Parasara are only necessary conditions and not sufficient conditions . In many charts satisfying the condition 
of a conditional dasa, Vimsottari dasa may still do minate over the conditional dasa. The conditional d asa may 
override Vimsottari dasa only in a limited number o f charts. The condition taught by Parasara  enables  the 
applicability of a dasa, but does not  guarantee  it. Some factors  in addition  to the condition are needed to 
guarantee it. Here is a proposed methodology. 
If we understand the subtle meaning of a condition and find its link to the seed nakshatra of the dasa, we can 
associate them to a planet. We can associate 9 cond itional nakshatra dasas to 9 planets. We can call t hem 
“controlling planets”. 
This controlling planet has a link to the condition  of the dasa and augments the condition. It also has a link to 
the seed nakshatra of the dasa. In addition to the condition being satisfied, the controlling planet s hould be 
strong ( i.e.  the principle behind the condition is augmented), for a conditional nakshatra dasa to work better than 
Vimsottari dasa. 
Dasa 
(years) 
Condition of Applicability Seed nakshatra 
(deity) 
Controlling 
Planet 
Shodasottari dasa 
(116) 
Lagna in Sun's hora in Sukla paksha or 
Lagna in Moon's hora in Krishna paksha 
Pushya 
(Jupiter) 
Jupiter 
Dwadasottari dasa 
(112) 
Lagna in Taurus/Libra navamsa Revati 
(Pushan) 
Ketu 
Ashtottari dasa 
(108) 
Rahu in a quadrant/trine from lagna lord, 
but not in lagna 
Ardra 
(Rudra) 
Mars 
Panchottari dasa 
(105) 
Lagna in Cancer dwadasamsa 1 Anuradha 
(Mitra) 
Venus 
Satabdika dasa Lagna in the same sign in rasi & nava msa Revati Sun 
1According to some translators of Parasara, lagna should be in Cancer in both rasi and dwadasamsa. But that is 
an incorrect translation. 

<<<PAGE_3>>>
Dasa 
(years) 
Condition of Applicability Seed nakshatra 
(deity) 
Controlling 
Planet 
(100) (Pushan) 
Chaturaaseeti dasa 
(84) 
The 10 th  lord in 10 th Swati 
(Vayu) 
Saturn 
Dwisaptati sama dasa 
(72) 
Lagna lord in 7 th  or 7th  lord in lagna Moola 
(Nirriti) 
Rahu 
Shashtisama dasa 
(60) 
Sun in lagna Aswini 
(Aswinis) 
Moon 
Shattrimsa sama dasa 
(36) 
Lagna in Sun's hora in daytime or 
Lagna in Moon's hora in night time 
Sravana 
(Vishnu) 
Mercury 
Let us go through the list and see the justification for each controlling planet. 
(1) Shodasottari  dasa  (116  years) :  The  seed  nakshatra  is  Pushya  and  its  deity is  Jup iter,  who  shows 
dhishakti (wisdom/intellect). This dasa is applicab le if lagna is in deva hora and Sun (soul) is in th e 
visible half from Moon (mind), or if lagna is in pi tri hora and Moon (mind) is in the visible half fro m 
Sun (soul). The condition shows a wise relationship  between mind and soul. Soul is a focus of mind in 
deva hora and mind is a focus of soul in pitri hora !! This dasa is applicable if such a wise relations hip 
exists between mind and soul. That is augmented if Jupiter showing wisdom affecting the relationship 
between soul and mind is strong. So Jupiter is the controlling planet. No wonder the seed nakshatra is  
Jupiter's Pushya. 
(2) Dwadasottari dasa (112 years) : The seed nakshatra is Revati and its deity is Poo shan. This dasa is 
applicable if lagna is in a navamsa owned by Venus.  Navamsa shows the inner sense of dharma and 
lagna  shows  one's  overall  personality.  Venus  stands for the  spirit  of happiness.  Lagna  being  in  a 
navamsa owned by Venus shows the importance of happ iness at a deeper level of personality. As real 
inner happiness comes with the freedom of detachmen t, this is augmented by Ketu (detachment and 
freedom).  Pooshan is one of 12 Adityas  who gives in ner strength. There are two dasas taking his 
nakshatra as the seed – Sataabdika dasa counts naks hatras zodiacally from Revati and Dwadasottari dasa 
counts nakshatras anti-zodiacally from Revati. The controlling planets are Sun and Ketu – the soul 
giving inherent inner strength and detachment retri eving that inner strength by undoing the bondages. 
Counting is reverse for Ketu, as he reverses all th e conditioning accumulated through various lives 
(“viparItaM ketoH” as Jaimini says). 
(3) Ashtottari dasa (108  years) : The seed nakshatra is Ardra and and its deity is Rudra.  This dasa is 
applicable if Rahu is in a quadrant/trine from lagn a lord, but not occupying lagna. Lagna shows the 5 
koshas (shells) that define a personality, while la gna lord shows the functioning of Purusha  through 
those koshas. Rahu shows the outcaste/deviant. Rahu 's trine/quadrant influence on the functioning of 
Purusha  through  koshas  shows  an  inventive,  fierce  a nd  rule-breaking  manner  in  which  cosmic 
intelligence works through one's personality.  Rahu being in lagna itself deprives the personality of 
vitality.  The energy and drive of Mars augments  the  inventive and rule-breaking manner in which 
cosmic intelligence functions through one's persona lity. The fierce Mars can be linked to Rudra, who 
owns Ardra nakshara. In fact, Mars is born from the sweat of Rudra. 
(4) Panchottari dasa (105  years) : The seed nakshatra is Anuradha and its deity is M itra. This dasa is 
applicable if lagna is in Cancer dwadasamsa. Dwadas amsa shows the source from which one comes and 
inherits.  Cancer  is  the  sign  of  creation.  Lagna  bei ng  in  Cancer  in  dwadasamsa  shows  a  creative 
personality that taps into one's creative roots. Ve nus showing jala tattwa (water element) augments th is 

<<<PAGE_4>>>
creative connection to the roots. Anuradha (literal ly, “following Radha”) nakshatra is owned by Mitra,  a 
Vedic deity of companionship. One can see a link to Venus. 
(5) Sataabdika dasa (100 years) : The seed nakshatra is Revati and and its deity is  Pooshan. This dasa is 
applicable if lagna is in the same sign in rasi and  navamsa. Navamsa shows inner sense of dharma and 
lagna being in the same sign in rasi and navamsa sh ows that one's personality maintains a synergy 
between  inner  sense of  dharma  and  outer  expression.  This  shows  a principled  and  strong  person. 
Strength of Sun (soul) augments this strength of pe rsonality. No wonder the seed nakshatra is ruled by  
Pooshan, one of the 12 Adityas who gives strength. 
(6) Chaturaaseeti sama dasa (84 years) : The seed nakshatra is Swaati and its deity is Vaa yu. This dasa is 
applicable if the 10 th  lord is in the 10 th  house. This shows importance of work in one's life , which is 
augmented by Saturn showing the work ethic. Saturn represents wind and no wonder Swati ruled by 
Vayu (wind) is the seed nakshatra. 
(7) Dwisaptati sama dasa (72 years) : The seed nakshatra is Moola and its deity is Nirr iti. This dasa is 
applicable if lagna lord is in 7 th  or 7th  lord is in lagna. That shows predominance of desir es (7 th  house) in 
one's personality (1 st  house).  That is augmented by Rahu who shows desire s. No wonder the seed 
nakshatra is Moola owned by Nirriti, who is shown by Rahu. 
(8) Shashtisama dasa (60 years) : The seed nakshatra is Aswini and its deities are Aswinis. This dasa is 
applicable if Sun is in lagna. Sun in lagna gives g ood will power, vitality and well-being. If this is  
augmented  by clarity of mind (Moon),  it enhances  vi tality  and  well-being.  Moon is the planet  of 
nurturing and cure, which is shown by twin deities Aswinis ruling Aswini star. No wonder Aswini is the  
seed nakshatra. 
(9) Shattrimsa sama dasa (36 years) : The seed nakshatra is Sravana and its deity is Vi shnu. This dasa is 
applicable if lagna is in deva hora and Sun (soul) is in the visible half from lagna (self that acts i n the 
world), or if lagna is in pitri hora and lagna (act ing self) is in the visible half from Sun (soul). S oul is a 
focus of acting self in deva hora and acting self i s a focus of soul in pitri hora. The condition show s a 
productive relationship between self that acts in t he world and soul, that promotes an understanding o f 
one's  existence  and  meaningful  actions.  That  is  aug mented  if  Mercury  showing  knowledge  and 
understanding is strong. So Mercury is the controll ing planet. Mercury shows sustainer Vishnu and no 
wonder the seed nakshatra is Vishnu's Sravana. 
Dasa Selection 
The idea is that controlling planet of a conditiona l dasa has to be strong in a chart in addition to t he condition 
being satisfied, for the dasa to dominate over Vims ottari dasa and other conditional nakshatra dasas. The 
principle behind the condition needs to be  augmented  by the  strength  of a planet that is important for that 
principle. That way, we can always pick the most applicable dasa in a chart. 
Use the following steps: 
(1) Evaluate the nine conditions and identify which conditional nakshatra dasas apply in the chart. 
(2) Among the applicable  conditional dasas, compare the strengths of controlling planets in the chart. Select 
the dasa with the strongest controlling planet. Use standard rules for strength. 
(a) The following is the decreasing order of strengt h of planets: 
(i) An exalted planet is the strongest, 
(ii) Next is a planet in moolatrikona, 
(iii) Next is a planet in own sign, 

<<<PAGE_5>>>
(iv) Next is a planet in an adhimitra rasi (super-fr iendly sign) 
(v) Next is a planet in a mitra rasi (friendly sign)
(vi) Planets in sama (neutral), satru (inimical), ad hisatru (super-inimical) rasis or in debilitation 
signs are weak and not to be considered. 
(b) Consider the following exceptions judiciously: 
(i) If a planet is at the very beginning or end of a  sign, it is weak. 
(ii) If a planet is associated with 9 th  or 10 th  lord, it  is extra strong. 
(iii) If a planet is combust or afflicted by enemies  or afflicted by the 6 th /8 th  lords, it is weak. 
(iv) Rahu and Ketu become strong when with other pla nets (any planets). 
(3) If controlling planet of no applicable dasa is p articularly strong, no conditional dasa applies. Ju st use 
Vimsottari dasa. There will be many charts in which Vimsottari dasa works the best. 
Dasas in Divisional Charts 
When analyzing a specific divisional chart for even ts related to a specific area of life, we can find nakshatra 
dasas from Moon in that divisional chart. In order to apply the conditions of conditional dasas in a d ivisional 
chart, we need to treat a divisional chart as rasi chart and further divide it into hora, navamsa and dwadasamsa 
charts. There is a precedent in tradition, in the f orm of charts such as nava-navamsa (D-81) and navam sa- 
dwadasamsa (D-108) charts. 
We also  need  to  evaluate  the conditions  of Shodasot tari  and  Shattrimsa sama  dasa  strictly based  on  the  
divisional chart in question. We define Sukla paksh a and Krishna paksha as Sun being in the visible ha lf from 
Moon and and Moon being in the visible half from Su n, respectively. We define daytime and night time a s Sun 
being in the visible half from lagna and and lagna being in the visible half from Sun, respectively. In fact, this is 
how we explained the connection between the conditi ons, seed nakshatras and controlling planets earlie r in this 
write-up. 
Use of Lagna and Sun 
Normally we use the nakshatra occupied by Moon in t he divisional chart of interest to find dasas. If M oon is 
particularly weak and lagna is stronger, we can use lagna instead. 
If Moon is waning and just below Sun's longitude or  badly afflicted by nodes or if all quadrants from Moon are 
empty or if Moon is in his marana karaka sthana (8 th  house) or if Moon is in deep debilitation or if Mo on is in 
gandanta, then Moon may be considered to be weak an d lagna preferred. Note that Sun is strengthened by  
planets in trines from him, while Moon is strengthened by planets in quadrants from him. Lagna is stre ngthened 
by both. 
In extremely rare cases where not only is Moon weak  but lagna is also weak ( i.e.  lagna is in deep gandanta or 
badly afflicted), we may use Sun if he is stronger.
Natal & Annual Charts 
These dasas can be used in the same manner in natal  charts and annual soli-lunar (Tithi Pravesha or TP ) charts. 
They are computed in annual charts just as they are  in natal charts. There is no need to consider the star 
occupied by Moon in natal chart and/or progress it.  Just take the rasi and divisional charts of the an nual chart 
and use them as though it is a natal chart. The dasas are simply compressed to the time period of the chart. 

<<<PAGE_6>>>
In natal chart, dasa of the best planet to give an event ( e.g.  marriage, childbirth) may not come at an appropria te 
age. So we sometimes see that mahadasa at the time of an event makes only some sense while antardasa a t the 
time of an event makes more sense. But, in annual charts, mahadasa at the time of an event should usually make 
excellent sense. The strongest candidate to give an event should give it in its mahadasa. 
Just for completeness, let us define the annual TP chart here. When the lunar month and lunar day (tithi) of birth 
return every year, we cast a chart at the exact tim e when the angle between Sun and Moon matches that at birth. 
This chart is used for making predictions for the one [lunar] year that follows. 
Examples with Annual Soli-lunar (TP) Charts 
Example 1: Childbirth 
Birthdata : 1970 April 4, 5:50:40 pm (IST), Machilipatnam, India (81e08, 16n10) 
Event : He had a child on 1996 February 19. 
Consider the annual TP chart of 1995-96. D-7 (saptamsa) chart shows children. D-7 of 1995-96 annual TP chart 
is shown below. 
In this D-7, lagna lord Venus is exalted in 11 th  house and 5 th  lord Mercury is exalted in 5 th  house. Both are in 
nearly exact samasaptaka (at 29Pi46 and 29Vi55!) an d give a powerful raja yoga. No wonder a child was born 
during the year! 
In this chart, let us evaluate the applicability of various conditional dasas: 


<<<PAGE_7>>>
(1) Lagna at 18Ta49  (second half of an even sign!) is in Deva hora. Sun is in the 12 th  house from Moon, i.e. 
in the visible half. If Sun (soul) is in the visibl e half from Moon (mind) in Deva hora or Moon is in the 
visible half from Sun in Pitri hora, then Shodasottari dasa applies. It applies here. 
(2) Lagna is at 18Ta49. It maps to Gemini in D-9 (i. e. D-9 of D-7). So Dwadasottari dasa does not apply . 
(Note: One can use “Sub-divisional chart for resear ch, (D-mxn, i.e. D-n of D-m)” in the pop-up menu on  
charts in "Jagannatha Hora" software to find D-9 of D-7.) 
(3) Lagna lord Venus is in Pi. Rahu is in Cp and not  in a trine/quadrant from him. So Ashtottari dasa d oes 
not apply. 
(4) Lagna is at 18Ta49. It maps to Sagittarius in D- 12 (i.e. D-12 of D-7). So Panchottari dasa does not  
apply. (Note: One can use “Sub-divisional chart for  research, (D-mxn, i.e. D-n of D-m)” in the pop-up 
menu on charts in "Jagannatha Hora" software to find D-12 of D-7.) 
(5) Lagna is in Taurus in D-7 and in Gemini in D-9 o f D-7, as seen in (2) above. So Sataabdika dasa doe s 
not apply. 
(6) Neither 10 th  lord occupies 10 th . So Chaturaaseeti sama dasa does not apply. 
(7) Neither the lagna lord is in 7 th , nor the 7 th  lord in lagna. So Dwisaptati sama dasa does not apply. 
(8) Sun is not in lagna. So Shashtisama dasa does not apply. 
(9) Lagna is in Deva hora. Lagna is in the visible half from Sun. So Shattrimsa sama dasa does not apply. 
Only Shodasottari dasa applies. Its controlling planet is Jupiter. He is in moolatrikona. Hence the dasa applies. 
As per compressed Shodasottari dasa from Moon of D- 7, Venus mahadasa ran during 1996 Jan 1-Feb 25. 
Mercury antardasa in Venus mahadasa ran during Febr uary 17-25. With lagna and 5 th  lords Venus and Mercury 
being both exalted and giving a raja yoga on the 5 th  house axis, this antardasa is a perfect candidate for a 
blessing like childbirth. 
Example 2: Childbirth 
Birthdata : 1970 April 4, 5:50:40 pm (IST), Machilipatnam, India (81e08, 16n10) 
Event : He had a child on 1998 August 21. 
Consider the annual TP chart of 1998-99. D-7 (saptamsa) chart shows children. D-7 of 1998-99 annual TP chart 
is shown below. 

<<<PAGE_8>>>
In this D-7, lagna lord Venus is in a quadrant in a n adhimitra rasi. The 5 th  lord and yogakaraka Saturn joins 9 th 
lord Mercury very closely. There is a raja yoga bet ween them. Being two natural malefics, they are wel l-placed 
in the 6 th  house. The 5 th  house of children is hemmed between these 3 trine lords! 
In this chart, let us evaluate the applicability of various conditional dasas: 
(1) Lagna at 18Li34  (second half of an odd sign!) is in Pitri hora. Moon is in the 12 th  house from Sun, i.e. in 
the visible half. If Sun (soul) is in the visible h alf from Moon (mind) in Deva hora or Moon is in the  
visible half from Sun in Pitri hora, then Shodasottari dasa applies. It applies here. 
(2) Lagna is at 18Li34. It maps to Pisces in D-9. So  Dwadasottari dasa does not apply. (Note: One can u se 
“Sub-divisional  chart  for  research,  (D-mxn,  i.e.  D- n  of  D-m)”  in  the  pop-up  menu  on  charts  in 
"Jagannatha Hora" software to find D-9 of D-7.) 
(3) Lagna lord Venus is in Capricorn. Rahu is in Sag ittarius and not in a trine/quadrant from him. So 
Ashtottari dasa does not apply. 
(4) Lagna is at 18Li34. It maps to Taurus in D-12. S o Panchottari dasa does not apply. (Note: One can u se 
“Sub-divisional  chart  for  research,  (D-mxn,  i.e.  D- n  of  D-m)”  in  the  pop-up  menu  on  charts  in 
"Jagannatha Hora" software to find D-12 of D-7.) 
(5) Lagna is in Libra in D-7 and in Pisces in D-9 of  D-7, as seen in (2) above. So Sataabdika dasa does  not 
apply. 
(6) The 10 th  lord is not in 10 th . So Chaturaaseeti sama dasa does not apply. 
(7) Neither the lagna lord is in 7 th , nor the 7 th  lord in lagna. So Dwisaptati sama dasa does not apply. 
(8) Sun is not in lagna. So Shashtisama dasa does not apply. 
(9) Lagna is in Pitri hora. Sun is in the visible half from lagna. So Shattrimsa sama dasa does not apply. 


<<<PAGE_9>>>
Only Shodasottari dasa applies. Its controlling pla net is Jupiter. He is in a neutral sign afflicted b y nodes. He is 
not strong. Hence the dasa does not apply. We fall back to Vimsottari dasa. 
As Moon is hardly 4 degrees before Sun ( i.e.  Amavasya Moon) and afflicted by nodes, he is very weak. So we 
use lagna instead of Moon. 
As per compressed Vimsottari dasa from lagna of D-7 , Mercury mahadasa ran during 1998 July 13-Sept 2. 
Jupiter antardasa in Mercury mahadasa ran during Au gust 17-24. Mercury is the 9 th  lord joining 5 th  lord. He is 
the dispositor of Jupiter and has an exchange with him. Jupiter is the dispositor of the 2 trine lords  giving a raja 
yoga and he aspects the 5 th  house and lagna. 
Example 3: Academic Distinction 
Birthdata : 1970 April 4, 5:50:40 pm (IST), Machilipatnam, India (81e08, 16n10) 
Event : He stood first in his state in 12 th  grade exams with a record score on 1987 May 28 and  got admission to 
Indian Institute of Technology after a couple of days. 
Consider the annual TP chart of 1987-88. D-24 (sidd hamsa) chart shows education. D-24 of 1987-88 annua l TP 
chart  is shown below. 
With lagna lord Venus in a trine in a friendly sign , with 5 th  lord Mercury exalted in 5 th  in close conjunction with 
yogakaraka (and friend) Saturn and a natural benefic Jupiter (8 th  lord showing sudden events), academic success 
and recognition in the year are very well-explained . Jupiter is also the karyesha (i.e. the 4 th  lord in rasi chart) 
and strong in the 4 th  house in rasi chart. 
Let us check the conditions of all conditional dasas. 
(1) Lagna at 16Ta30  (second half of an even sign!) is in Deva hora. Moon is in the 6 th  house from Sun, i.e. 
in the invisible half. If Sun (soul) is in the visible half from Moon (mind) in Deva hora or Moon is i n the 
visible half from Sun in Pitri hora, then Shodasottari dasa applies. It applies here. 
(2) Lagna is at 16Ta30. It maps to Taurus in D-9. So  Dwadasottari dasa applies. (Note: One can use “Sub - 
divisional chart for research, (D-mxn, i.e. D-n of D-m)” in the pop-up menu on charts in "Jagannatha 
Hora" software to find D-9 of D-7.) 
(3) Lagna lord Venus is in Capricorn. Rahu is in Ari es and in a trine/quadrant from him. So Ashtottari dasa 
applies. 
(4) Lagna is at 16Ta30. It maps to Scorpio in D-12. So Panchottari dasa does not apply. (Note: One can use 
“Sub-divisional  chart  for  research,  (D-mxn,  i.e.  D- n  of  D-m)”  in  the  pop-up  menu  on  charts  in 
"Jagannatha Hora" software to find D-12 of D-7.) 
(5) Lagna is in Taurus in D-7 and in D-9 of D-7, as seen in (2) above. So Sataabdika dasa applies. 
(6) Neither 10 th  lord is in 10 th . So Chaturaaseeti sama dasa does not apply. 
(7) Neither the lagna lord is in 7 th , nor the 7 th  lord in lagna. So Dwisaptati sama dasa does not apply. 
(8) Sun is not in lagna. So Shashtisama dasa does not apply. 
(9) Lagna is in Deva hora. Lagna is in the visible half from Sun. So Shattrimsa sama dasa does not apply. 

<<<PAGE_10>>>
So Shodasottari dasa, Dwadasottati dasa, Ashtottari dasa and Sataabdika dasa dasa apply. 
Controlling planet of Shodasottari dasa is Jupiter.  He is not particularly strong in Vi, being in an a dhisatru rasi 
(super-inimical sign), based on compound relationship. 
Controlling planet of Dwadasottati dasa is Ketu. He is not particularly strong in Ar, being in a sama rasi (neutral 
sign), based on compound relationship. 
Controlling planet of Ashtottari dasa is Mars. He i s not particularly strong in Ge, being in a sama ra si (neutral 
house), based on compound relationship. 
Controlling planet of Sataabdika dasa is Sun. He is in own house and strong! 
Sun is the strongest planet among the controlling p lanets of applicable conditional nakshatra dasas. S o we pick 
Sataabdika dasa. 
As per compressed Sataabdika dasa from Moon of D-24 , Mercury mahadasa Jupiter antardasa gave the event . 
Mercury is the 5 th  lord exalted in the 5 th  house. Jupiter is strong karyesha in rasi chart an d joins Mercury in the 
5th  house in D-24. 
Example 4: Going Abroad 
Birthdata : 1970 April 4, 5:50:40 pm (IST), Machilipatnam, India (81e08, 16n10) 
Event : He left his motherland on 1994 November 11. 
Consider the annual TP chart of 1994-95. D-4 (chatu rthamsa) chart shows residence. D-4 of 1994-95 annu al TP 
chart  is shown below. 


<<<PAGE_11>>>
With 12 th  co-lord and significator of going abroad, Rahu, oc cupying a watery sign in the 9 th  house and with 12 th 
co-lord Saturn aspecting 12 th , going abroad during the year makes sense. 
If we check the conditions of all conditional dasas , we will see that only Shodasottari dasa and Shatt rimsa sama 
dasa apply. Controlling planet of Shodasottari dasa is Jupiter. Though he is in an adhimitra rasi, he is retrograde 
and aspected by a strong 8 th  lord. He is not particularly strong. Controlling p lanet of Shattrimsa sama dasa is 
Mercury. He is debilitated and weak. 
So we are better off using Vimsottari dasa. 
As per compressed Vimsottari dasa from Moon of D-4,  Rahu mahadasa Saturn antardasa gave the event. As 
mentioned earlier, Rahu and Saturn are the 12 th  lords. Saturn aspects 12 th  and has 3/4 th  aspect on 9 th . Rahu 
occupies 9 th  in a watery sign. 
Example 5: Childbirth 
Birthdata : 1973 July 26, 9:48:10 pm (IST), Guntur, India (80e27, 16n18) 
Event : She had a child on 2000 September 28. 
Consider the annual TP chart of 2000-01. D-7 (saptamsa) chart shows children. D-7 of 2000-01 annual TP chart 
is shown below. 
In this D-7, lagna lord Venus is in 11 th  house and aspects the 5 th  house, while 5 th  lord Saturn is exalted in lagna. 
The other 5 th  lord Rahu is in a quadrant in an adhimitra rasi. S o this D-7 and 5 th  house in it are very strong. No 
wonder a child was born during the year. 


<<<PAGE_12>>>
In this chart, Shodasottari dasa, Dwadasottari dasa  and Shattrimsa sama dasa apply. Controlling planet s are 
Jupiter, Ketu and Mercury respectively. Jupiter and  Ketu are in sama rasis (neutral signs), while Merc ury is in a 
mitra rasi (friendly sign), as per compound relatio nships. However, combust Mercury is not strong enou gh in a 
mitra rasi. So we just fall back to Vimsottari dasa. 
Though Moon is exalted, he is in marana karaka stha na in the 8 th  house and weak. So we take lagna as the seed 
of dasa instead of Moon. 
As per compressed Vimsottari dasa from lagna of D-7 , Saturn mahadasa ran during 2000 August 29-October  
29. Saturn mahadasa Venus antardasa ran during Sept ember 21-October 1. With 5 th  lord Saturn exalted in lagna 
and with lagna lord Venus aspecting 5 th , this antardasa is a perfect candidate for childbirth. 
Example 6: Childbirth 
Birthdata : 1973 July 26, 9:48:10 pm (IST), Guntur, India (80e27, 16n18) 
Event : She had a child on 2003 June 21. 
Consider the annual TP chart of 2002-03. D-7 (saptamsa) chart shows children. D-7 of 2002-03 annual TP chart 
is shown below. 
In this D-7, lagna lord Venus is in a quadrant in a  friendly sign and has 3/4 th  aspect on the 5 th  house and its lord, 
while 5 th  lord Mercury is exalted in 5 th ! The 5 th  house contains a raja yoga between 5 th  and 4 th  lords. So this D-7 
and 5 th  house in it are very strong. No wonder a child was born during the year. 


<<<PAGE_13>>>
In this chart, Shodasottari dasa, Ashtottari dasa a nd Shattrimsa sama dasa apply. Controlling planets are Jupiter, 
Mars  and  Mercury  respectively.  Jupiter  is  in  moolatrikona,  Mars  is  in  adhimitra  rasi  and  Mercury  is  in  
exaltation sign. Though Mercury would have normally  been taken as the strongest planet (exaltation is superior 
to moolatrikona placement), here Mercury is within 7 arc-min from Sun. He is deeply combust. So we tak e 
Jupiter to be stronger. So Shodasottari dasa is the  strongest dasa. Though quadrants from Moon are emp ty, 
Moon is in own sign and 2 nd  and 12 th  are occupied (Dhurdhara yoga). So he is strong enough to be the seed. 
As per compressed Shodasottari dasa from Moon of D- 7, Sun mahadasa ran during 2003 June 18-July 22. Su n 
antardasa in Sun mahadasa ran during June 18-21. Gi ven the powerful raja yoga between Mercury and Sun in 
the 5 th  house, they are perfect candidates for giving chil dbirth. As Mercury and Sun are very close within 7 arc- 
min, Mercury is deeply combust. So Sun will dominate him and give the result of the rajayoga in his period. 
Example 7: Childbirth 
Birthdata : 1970 October 5, 12:32:20 pm (IST), 80e21, 15n49 
Event : He had a child on 2000 September 28. 
Consider the annual TP chart of 1999-2000. D-7 (sap tamsa) chart shows children. D-7 of 1999-2000 annua l TP 
chart  is shown below. 
In  this D-7, lagna lord Mercury is in 9 th  house while the 5 th  lord Venus is in the 5 th  house itself, in his 
moolatrikona! So this D-7 and 5 th  house in it are very strong. No wonder a child was born during the year. 
In this chart, only Shodasottari dasa applies. Cont rolling planet is Jupiter. He is in an adhisatru ra si (super- 
inimical sign). He is weak. So we fall back to Vimsottari dasa. 


<<<PAGE_14>>>
As per compressed Vimsottari dasa from Moon of D-7,  Venus mahadasa Mercury antardasa gave the event. 
Venus is the 5 th  lord in 5 th  house, while Mercury is the lagna lord in 9 th ! From dasa lord Venus, Mercury is 9 th 
lord in 5 th  house. This mahadasa antardasa combination is the perfect candidate for giving a child. 
Example 8: Childbirth 
Birthdata : 1970 October 5, 12:32:20 pm (IST), 80e21, 15n49 
Event : He had a child on 2003 June 21. 
Consider the annual TP chart of 2002-03. D-7 (saptamsa) chart shows children. D-7 of 2002-03 annual TP chart 
is shown below. 
In this D-7, 5 th  and 11 th  lords are in parivartana aspecting their respectiv e houses. This can give gain of a child. 
In addition, lagna lord and 9 th  lord are in very close samasaptaka  (within less than a degree), showing fortune in 
this area of life during the year. 
In this chart, Shodasottari dasa, Dwisaptati sama d asa and Shattrimsa sama dasa apply. Controlling pla nets are 
Jupiter, Rahu and Mercury respectively. Jupiter and  Rahu are in adhisatru rasis, while Mercury is in a  satru rasi 
(compound relationship). None of them is strong eno ugh. However, Rahu becomes strong in the signs of M oon 
and Sun, especially when not alone. He gets really charged up when he occupies the houses of luminarie s. 
Moreover, here he is in good company! So Rahu in Ca ncer with Saturn is taken to be strong! So we use 
Dwisaptati sama dasa. 
As per compressed Dwisaptati sama dasa from Moon of  D-7, Moon mahadasa Saturn antardasa gave the event . 
Moon is the 5 th  lord in 11 th  and Saturn is the 11 th  lord in 5 th . This exchange and samasaptaka of 5 th  and 11 th  lords 
is auspicious for the gain of a child. 


<<<PAGE_15>>>
Example 9: Political Power (Barack Obama) 
Birthdata : 1961 August 4, 7:24:20 pm (10 hrs west of GMT), Honolulu, Hwaii, USA (157w52, 21n18) 
Event : He was elected as US President on 2008 November 4. 
Consider the annual TP chart of 2008-09. D-10 (dasa msa) chart shows career. D-10 of 2008-09 annual TP chart 
is shown below. 
In this D-10, lagna and 10 th  lord Jupiter is exalted in the 5 th  house of power while the 5 th  lord Moon is closely 
conjoined with the exalted 7 th  lord in 7 th  giving a powerful rajayoga. Though Rahu is also wi th them and Venus 
in Pisces and Saturn in Sagittarius (both functiona l malefics here) have an aspect on Moon, those infl uences are 
are weaker than that of Mercury, who is within 3.5 degrees from Moon. The strength of the 5 th  house can show 
getting some power in this year. 
In this chart, Shodasottari dasa and Sataabdika das a apply. Controlling planets are Jupiter and Sun. T hough 
Jupiter is exalted, he is retrograde and that makes  him a bit weak. He also has 3/4 th  aspect from Saturn. Sun on 
the other hand is in own house and unafflicted. So we take Sun to be stronger and use Sataabdika dasa.
As for reference for dasa, Moon closely afflicted b y an enemy at the beginning of a sign and afflicted  by Rahu 
is not that strong and lagna in deep gandanta is no t strong either. In comparison, unafflicted Sun in own sign is 
exceedingly strong, though also at the beginning of  a sign. So we take Sun as the seed. [N OTE : We very rarely 
need to use Sun as the seed.] 


<<<PAGE_16>>>
As per compressed Sataabdika dasa from Sun of D-10,  Jupiter mahadasa Mercury antardasa gave the event.  
Jupiter is the lagna and 10 th  lord exalted in the 5 th  house of power, while Mercury is exalted disposito r of the 5 th 
lord and also takes part in a raja yoga with the 5 th  lord. 
Example 10: Political Power (Barack Obama) 
Birthdata : 1961 August 4, 7:24:20 pm (10 hrs west of GMT), Honolulu, Hwaii, USA (157w52, 21n18) 
Event : He was re-elected as US President on 2012 November 6. 
Consider the annual TP chart of 2012-13. D-10 (dasa msa) chart shows career. D-10 of 2012-13 annual TP chart 
is shown below. 
In this D-10, lagna lord Saturn is exalted in the 10 th  house of career. Venus is the lord of the 10 th  house of career 
and the 5 th  house of power. He is a yogakaraka and is exalted.  Though he is with 8 th  lord Sun, there is enough 
gap between them to make the affliction weak. Due t o the Saturn-Moon combination in the 10 th  house, there 
were some tensions and most opinion polls leading t o the election predicted a Mitt Romney win or a clo se call. 
But, in the end, it was an easy win. 
In this chart, Shodasottari dasa, Sataabdika dasa a nd Shat-trimsa sama dasa apply.  Controlling planets  are 
Jupiter, Sun and Mercury. Jupiter is in a sama rasi  based on compound relationship, while Sun and Merc ury are 
in adhimitra rasis. While Sun is afflicted by a str ong (exalted) adhisatru (Venus), Mercury is afflict ed by only a 
weak satru (Jupiter). So Mercury is less afflicted. We take Mercury to be stronger. 
As per compressed Shat-trimsa sama dasa from Moon o f D-10, Venus mahadasa Venus antardasa gave the 
event. Venus is exalted yogakaraka and the 5 th  lord of power. 


<<<PAGE_17>>>
Example 11: Political Power (George W Bush) 
Birthdata : 1946 July 6, 7:25:30 am (EDT – 4:00 west of GMT),  New Haven, CT, USA (72w56, 41n18) 
Event : He was elected as the president of US in on 2000 December 15. Elections were held on November 7, but  
there was a protracted court fight on the recountin g of some Florida ballots. He was finally declared winner on 
2000 December 15. 
Consider the annual TP chart of 2000-01. D-10 (dasa msa) chart shows career. D-10 of 2000-01 annual TP chart 
is shown below. 
In this D-10, 5 th  lord Mercury aspects the 5 th  house of power from the 11 th  house of gains and the 11 th  lord 
Jupiter is in 5 th  house. This exchange and samasaptaka between 5 th  and 11 th  lords shows gain of power. The 10 th 
house is also strong with a raja yoga between lagna co-lord and yogakaraka. Overall, getting some power during 
the year is possible. 
In this chart, Shodasottari dasa, Ashtottari dasa, Dwisaptati sama dasa, Shashtisama dasa and Shattrim sa sama 
dasa apply.  Controlling  planets are Jupiter,  Mars,  Rahu, Moon  and  Mercury.  Jupiter in an  adhisatru  ras i, 
Mercury in a satru rasi, Rahu in debilitation sign and Moon in mitra rasi are weaker than Mars in exal tation 
sign. So we use Ashtottari dasa. 
As per compressed Ashtottari dasa from Moon of D-10 , Moon dasa was running at the time of elections. M oon 
is the 6 th  lord in a Martian sign aspected by Mars and he gav e litigation. Next dasa was Mars dasa from 
November 19 to December 15. Mars being the exalted 10 th  lord but in 12 th , he gave uncertainty and litigation. 
Mercury dasa started on December 15. Mercury being the 5 th  lord aspecting 5 th  and being in an exchange and 
samasaptaka  with  the  11 th  lord,  he  gave  power.  He  was  declared  winner  in  Mer cury  mahadasa  Mercury 
antardasa. 


<<<PAGE_18>>>
Example 12: Political Power (George W Bush) 
Birthdata : 1946 July 6, 7:25:30 am (EDT – 4:00 west of GMT),  New Haven, CT, USA (72w56, 41n18) 
Event : He was re-elected as the president of US in on 2004 November 2. 
Consider the annual TP chart of 2004-05. D-10 (dasa msa) chart shows career. D-10 of 2004-05 annual TP chart 
is shown below. 
In this D-10, 5 th  lord Venus aspects the 5 th  house of power from the 11 th  house of gains. This is conducive to 
retaining power. In addition, lagna lord Mercury is  in a quadrant in a friendly sign and 9 th  lord is strong in own 
house. The afflictions in the 4 th  house show lack of peace in career and worries, bu t the strength of trines is 
conducive to retaining the power. 
In this chart, Ashtottari dasa applies. Controlling  planet Mars is in a sama rasi. So we fall back to Vimsottari 
dasa. [NOTE : It may appear like Dwisaptati sama dasa applies h ere. However, from lagna at 6Ge30, Mercury at 
25Sg31 is actually in the 8 th  house and not the 7 th  house.] 
As Moon is at the beginning of the sign (0Vi55), hi ghly waning and afflicted by nodes, he is weak. We will use 
lagna as the seed. Lagna is stronger. 
As per compressed Vimsottari dasa from lagna of D-1 0, Saturn mahadasa Venus antardasa was running at t he 
time results came out. Saturn is the strong 9 th  lord in own house and aspecting the 5 th  house and having 80% 
aspect on the 5 th  lord. Venus is the 5 th  lord aspecting 5 th  house. So this period can give a favorable result relating 
to maintaining one's political power. 


<<<PAGE_19>>>
Example 13: Death of Father (Rajiv Gandhi) 
Birthdata : 1944 August 20, 7:12 am (IST), 72e49, 18n58 
Event : His father Feroze Gandhi died on 1957 April 4. 
Consider the annual TP chart of 1956-57. D-12 (dwad asamsa) chart shows parents. D-12 of 1956-57 annual  TP 
chart  is shown below. 
In this D-12, the 9 th  house of father is Le. Taking that as lagna, 2 debilitated planets (Mercury and Venus) are on 
the 2 nd -8 th  axis with nodes. If the lord of the 3 rd  house of vitality is in 2 nd  house of its loss (or vice versa), it can 
be a maraka combination. If the lord of the 8 th  house of longevity is in the 7 th  house of its loss (or vice versa), it 
can also be a maraka combination. In addition, any functional malefics occupying or aspecting the 2 nd  house can 
become marakas. Here Venus and Mercury are function al malefics for Le and Venus is in 2 nd  while Mercury 
aspects it. Venus is the 3 rd  lord in 2 nd , while Rahu is the 7 th  co-lord in 8 th . There are clear maraka combinations in 
this D-12, from the 9 th  house of father. 
In this chart, lagna is right in the middle of a si gn. This brings into question the applicability of Shodasottari 
dasa  and  Shattrimsa  sama  dasa  (i.e.  evaluation  of  applicability  changes  with  slight  change  in  birthtime). 
However, Mercury and Jupiter are weak in neutral ho uses and so it doesn't matter anyway. Sun and Satur n are 
quite strong and Moon is moderately strong, but Sat aabdika dasa, Chaturaaseeti sama dasa and Shashtisa ma 
dasa do not apply. So we just use Vimsottari dasa. 
As per compressed Vimsottari dasa from Moon of D-12 , Venus mahadasa Saturn antardasa gave the event. 
Venus is a clear maraka from Le as seen before. Sat urn is the 7 th  lord and a maraka too. He can also give Rahu's 
results. 


<<<PAGE_20>>>
Example 14: Death of Mother (Rajiv Gandhi) 
Birthdata : 1944 August 20, 7:12 am (IST), 72e49, 18n58 
Event : His mother Indira Gandhi was assassinated on 1984 October 31. 
Consider the annual TP chart of 1984-85. D-12 (dwad asamsa) chart shows parents. D-12 of 1984-85 annual  TP 
chart  is shown below. 
In this D-12, the 4 th  house of mother is Vi. Taking that as lagna, the 7 th  lord Jupiter is in 8 th , closely conjoining 
the 8 th  lord. The 7 th  lord is a maraka and he becomes potent when in 8 th  or with 8 th  lord. The 6 th  lord Rahu is 
aspecting him from 12 th  and can indicate some conspiracy or enmity behind it. 
In this chart, no conditional nakshatra dasa applies. So we use Vimsottari dasa. 
As per compressed Vimsottari dasa from Moon of D-12 , Jupiter mahadasa Jupiter antardasa 2 gave the event. 
Jupiter is clearly the maraka as seen already. 
Example 15: Political power (Rajiv Gandhi) 
Birthdata : 1944 August 20, 7:12 am (IST), 72e49, 18n58 
Event : He unexpectedly became India's Prime Minister in the first week of 1984 November, after his mother 
was assassinated. 
2The year is taken to be 13 lunar months instead of 12 here, due to adhika bhadrapada masa in 1985. 


<<<PAGE_21>>>
Consider the annual TP chart of 1984-85. D-10 (dasa msa) chart shows career. D-10 of 1984-85 annual TP chart 
is shown below. 
In this D-10, lagna lord Sun is in the 5 th  house of power in a super-friendly sign. The 5 th  lord Jupiter is strong in 
own sign.  This shows getting  some recognition or po wer.  Placement  of 5 th  lord in 8 th  shows suddenness. 
Placement of Sun in 5 th  in gandanta and affliction of nodes suggests some unfortunate background. 


<<<PAGE_22>>>
In this chart, Sataabdika dasa and Shattrimsa sama dasa apply. Sataabdika dasa controller Sun is in ga ndanta 
and weak. Though Mercury is in a friendly sign (Jup iter's), he is retrograde and afflicted by nodes. H e is not 
strong either. So we just fall back on Vimsottari dasa. 
It may seem like Ashtottari dasa applies here, but lagna lord Sun at 1Sg14 and Rahu at 25Ge08 are not exactly 
in quadrants or trines. Rahu is in the 8 th  house from lagna lord Sun. 
As per compressed Vimsottari dasa from Moon of D-10, Sun mahadasa Jupiter antardasa 3 gave the event. Sun is 
the lagna lord in 5 th  house in a super-friendly sign while Jupiter is the 5 th  lord strongly placed in own sign. 
Example 16: Marriage 
Birthdata : 1975 July 13, 4:02 pm (IST), Eluru, India (81e06, 16n42) 
Event : She got married on 2001 February 28. 
Consider the annual TP chart of 2000-01. D-9 (navamsa) chart shows marriage. D-9 of 2000-01 annual TP chart 
is shown below. 
In this D-9, lagna lord in moolatrikona and 5 th  lord in exaltation are together. There is a raja yoga between them, 
that brings the blessings of poorvapunya. The 7 th  lord Venus is in the 9 th  house of fortune from the 7 th  house of 
marriage, in an adhimitra rasi without any afflicti ons. He is quite strong and can give marriage. Ther e is also a 
raja yoga between the 4 th  lord of sukha and 9 th  lord of dharma. 
In this chart, Ashtottari dasa and Shashtisama dasa  apply. As Mars is stronger than Moon, we pick Asht ottari 
dasa. 
3The year is taken to be 13 lunar months instead of 12 here, due to adhika bhadrapada masa in 1985. 


<<<PAGE_23>>>
As per compressed Ashtottari dasa from Moon of D-9,  Venus mahadasa Mars antardasa gave the event. Venu s 
is the strong 7 th  lord of marriage. Mars is the strong lagna lord an d in the 11 th  house of fructification from 
Venus. 
Example 17: Marriage (Barack Obama) 
Birthdata : 1961 August 4, 7:24:20 pm (10 hrs west of GMT), Honolulu, Hwaii, USA (157w52, 21n18) 
Event : He got married on 1992 October 3. 
Consider the annual TP chart of 1992-93. D-9 (navamsa) chart shows marriage. D-9 of 1992-93 annual TP chart 
is shown below. 
In this D-9, one 7 th  lord Rahu is in the 11 th  house of fructification aspecting the 7 th  house. The other 7 th  lord 
Saturn is also aspecting the 7 th  house, while yogakaraka occupies the 7 th  house. This makes the 7 th  house 
powerful. 
In this chart, Dwadasottari dasa and Ashtottari das a apply. Neither Ketu nor Mars is strong being alon e in 
inimical signs. Dwisaptati sama dasa may seem to ap ply here, but 7 th  lord Saturn at 1Le42 is actually in the 12 th 
house from lagna at 23Le0. So Dwisaptati sama dasa does not really apply. 
As per compressed Vimsottari dasa from Moon of D-9,  Rahu mahadasa Saturn antardasa gave the event. As 
explained previously, Rahu and Saturn are the 7 th  lords aspecting the 7 th  house. 
Example 18: Vehicular accident 
Birthdata : 1970 April 4, 5:50 pm (IST), Machilipatnam, India (81e08, 16n10) 
Event : He had a major vehicular accident on 1996 December 5. He was fine, but car was totalled. 


<<<PAGE_24>>>
Consider the annual TP chart of 1996-97. D-16 (shod asamsa) chart shows vehicle. D-16 of 1996-97 annual  TP 
chart  is shown below. 
In this D-16, let us take the 4 th  house of vehicle as lagna. From Cp, lagna lord Sat urn and 8 th  lord Sun are in 
lagna  together.  That  is  a  bad  combination.  The  8 th  lord  afflicting  lagna  and  lagna  lord  can  cause  har m. 
Moreover, the 2 nd  house contains multiple planets including the 7 th  and 2 nd  lords. This is a maraka combination. 
In this chart, Ashtottari dasa and Shat-trimsa sama dasa apply. Mars is not strong, but Mercury is exalted. So we 
use Shat-trimsa sama dasa. 
As per compressed Shat-trimsa sama dasa from Moon o f D-16, Rahu mahadasa Jupite antardasa gave the eve nt. 
Rahu is a maraka being the 2 nd  lord in 2 nd  (from the 4 th  house). Jupiter is the 3 rd  lord in badhaka sthana. In 
addition, from the 4 th  house from dasa lord Rahu, Jupiter is the 8 th  lord in 7 th  and a maraka. 


<<<PAGE_25>>>
Examples with Natal Charts 
We will see some examples of conditonal nakshatra dasas with natal charts now. 
It has been seen that mahadasa at the time of an ev ent usually makes excellent sense in annual charts.  The 
strongest candidate to give an event usually gives it in its mahadasa. In natal charts, however, dasa of the best 
planet to give an event ( e.g.  marriage, childbirth) may not come at an appropriate age. So we sometimes see that 
mahadasa at the time of an event may make only limi ted sense while antardasa at the time of an event m ay 
make more sense. 
Example 19: Political Power (George W Bush) 
Birthdata : 1946 July 6, 7:25:30 am (EDT – 4:00 west of GMT),  New Haven, CT, USA (72w56, 41n18) 
Event : He was elected as the president of US in in 2000 December and re-elected in November 2004. 
D-10 (dasamsa) chart shows career. D-10 of natal chart  is shown below. 
In this D-10, lagna is in Pitri hora. As Moon and l agna are in insivible half from Sun, neither Shodas ottari dasa 
nor Shatrtimsa sama dasa applies. As lagna navamsa (D-9 of D-10) is in Ge, Dwadasottari dasa does not apply. 
Lagna does not contain Sun and Shashtisama dasa doe s not apply. As lagna does not contain 7 th  lord and 7 th 
does not contain lagna lord, Dwisaptati sama dasa d oes not apply. As the 10 th  lord is not in 10 th , Chaturaaseeti 
sama dasa does not apply. As lagna dwadasamsa (D-12 of D-10) is in Ta, Panchottari dasa does not apply. 
As lagna lord Mercury is in a quadrant from Rahu an d Rahu is not in lagna, Ashtottari dasa applies. As  lagna is 
in vargottama, Sataabdika dasa applies. The control ling planets are Mars and Sun respectively. Mars is  exalted 
and quite strong. So we use Ashtottari dasa. 


<<<PAGE_26>>>
As per Ashtottari dasa from Moon of natal D-10, Sat urn mahadasa ran from November 1999 to November 
2009. It was in this period that he became the repu blican candidate for presidential election of 2000,  then 
elected as US president and re-elected. He was US p resident from January 2001 till January 2009. That entirely 
falls in Saturn mahadasa. 
Saturn is a functional benefic for Ge lagna and he is exalted in the 5 th  house of power! In fact, there is an 
exchange between 5 th  lord Venus and 9 th  lord Saturn. This, in addition to lagna lord Mercu ry in lagna, makes 
this a blessed D-10 chart. 
He was elected US president during Saturn mahadasa Saturn antardasa. His re-election with wider margin  came 
during Saturn mahadasa Venus antardasa. Venus is the 5 th  lord in 9 th . Previously, he was elected as the governor 
of Texas state in Mercury mahadasa Venus antardasa.
Example 20: Political Power (John F Kennedy) 
Birthdata : 1917 May 29, 3:59 pm (4 hrs west of GMT), Brookline, Massachusetts, USA (71w07, 42n20) 
Event : He was elected as the President of USA in the first week of 1960 November. 
D-10 (dasamsa) chart shows career. D-10 of natal chart  is shown below. 
In this D-10, Shodasottari dasa, Ashtottari dasa an d Shashtisama dasa apply. Controlling planets are J upiter, 
Mars and Moon. Jupiter is in an adhisatru rasi and Moon is in a satru rasi (as per compound relationships). Mars 
in an adhimitra rasi is stronger than both. So we use Ashtottari dasa. 
Moon is just below Sun in D-10 (i.e. Amavasya Moon). So he is weak to be considered as the seed for dasas. So 
we use lagna. As per Ashtottari dasa from lagna of natal D-10, Moon mahadasa Sun antardasa gave the ev ent. 
Moon and Sun are the 4 th  and 5 th  lord closely conjoined in lagna and giving a powerful raja yoga! 


<<<PAGE_27>>>
Example 21: Childbirth 
Birthdata : 1971 March 31, 4:56 am (IST), Amaravati, India (80e22, 16n35) 
Event : She had a child on 2000 January 12. 
D-7 (saptamsa) chart shows children. D-7 of natal chart  is shown below. 
In  this  D-7,  Shodasottari  dasa,  Ashtottari  dasa,  Chaturaseeti  sama  dasa  and  Shattrimsa sama  dasa  apply . 
Controlling planets are Jupiter, Mars, Saturn and M ercury. Jupiter is in a satru rasi. Mercury is in a n adhimitra 
rasi. But Mars in moolatrikona is stronger than bot h. However, Saturn in exaltation sign beats him! So  we use 
Chaturaaseeti sama dasa. 
As per Chaturaaseeti sama dasa from Moon of natal D -7, Jupiter mahadasa Mars antardasa gave the event.  
Jupiter is the significator of children and also th e 9 th  lord involved in a raja yoga (by samasaptaka) with  lagna 
lord Moon. Mars is yogakaraka placed in moolatrikona and also the 5 th  lord of children! 
Example 22: Childbirth 
Birthdata : 1970 April 4, 5:50:40 pm (IST), Machilipatnam, India (81e08, 16n10) 
Event : He had a child on 1996 February 19. 
D-7 (saptamsa) chart shows children. D-7 of natal chart  is shown below. 
In this D-7, Shodasottari dasa and Ashtottari dasa  apply. Controlling planets are Jupiter and Mars. T hough 
Jupiter is in moolatrikona, he is retrograde and af flicted by Rahu and 6 th  lord Venus. Aspect of Rahu on Jupiter 
is too close. So Shodasottari dasa does not dominat e over Vimsottari dasa. Mars is in an adhisatru ras i and 
weak. So Ashtottari dasa does not dominate over Vimsottari dasa either. So we fall back to Vimsottari dasa. 


<<<PAGE_28>>>
As all the quadrants from Moon are empty, Moon is w eak. In contrast, all trines from lagna are occupie d – two 
by planets in exaltation/moolatrikona. So lagna is much stronger. We start Vimsottari dasa from lagna.
As per Vimsottari dasa from lagna of D-7, Sun mahad asa Jupiter antardasa gave the child. With Sun bein g the 
9th  lord  exalted  in  5 th ,  his  dasa  can  be  very auspicious  for  the blessing  of a  childbirth.  Jupiter  is  in  his 
moolatrikona in lagna and aspects the 5 th  and 9 th  houses. 
Example 23: Childbirth 
Birthdata : 1970 April 4, 5:50:40 pm (IST), Machilipatnam, India (81e08, 16n10) 
Event : He had a second child on 1998 August 21. 
As mentioned in the previous example, Vimsottari da sa started from lagna is the best in this D-7. As p er 
Vimsottari dasa from lagna of D-7, Sun mahadasa Venus antardasa gave the event. From the 7 th  house of second 
child, Venus is 5 th  lord in lagna in an adhimitra rasi. He can give the second child. 
Example 24: Academic Distinction 
Birthdata : 1970 April 4, 5:50:40 pm (IST), Machilipatnam, India (81e08, 16n10) 
Event : He got admission to IIT in the first week of June  1987 and also stood first in his state in 12 th  grade with a 
record score. 
D-24 (siddhamsa) chart shows education. D-24 of natal chart  is shown below. 


<<<PAGE_29>>>
In this D-24, Ashtottari dasa and Sataabdika dasa are applicable. Controlling planets are Mars and Sun. Being in 
adhisatru rasis, neither is strong. So we fall back to Vimsottari dasa. 
As per Vimsottari dasa from Moon of D-24, Venus mahadasa Venus antardasa gave the event. Venus is the lord 
of the 4 th  house of education and exalted in the 9 th  house of fortune. He gives fortune in education. B eing an 
exalted planet in a trine, he gives excellent results in education. 
Example 25: Going Abroad 
Birthdata : 1970 April 4, 5:50:40 pm (IST), Machilipatnam, India (81e08, 16n10) 
Event : He left his motherland on 1994 November 11. 
D-4 (chaturthamsa) chart shows residence. D-4 of natal chart is shown below. 
If we check the conditions of all conditional dasas, we will see that no conditional dasa applies. 
Moon is in deep debilitation and in gandanta. Lagna is strong enough with 2 planets in trines. Taking Vimsottari 
dasa from lagna of D-4, we see that Mercury mahadas a Moon antardasa gave the event. Mercury is the bad haka 
lord and 7 th  lord of long travels. The exalted 12 th  lord aspects him. Moon is in the 9 th  house of foreign travel in a 
watery sign. 
Previously, in Mercury mahadasa Ketu antardasa also , the native left motherland and lived abroad for 2  years. 
He came back for a year and left again on 1994 Nove mber 11. He has been living outside his motherland since 
then. Ketu is the 9 th  lord in 12 th . His antardasa took him abroad for the first time.


<<<PAGE_30>>>
Example 26: Going Abroad 
Birthdata : 1976 April 25, 2:32 am (IST), Vijayawada, India (80e37, 16n31) 
Event : He left his motherland India around 1997 August 5. 
D-4 (chaturthamsa) chart shows residence. D-4 of natal chart is shown below. 


<<<PAGE_31>>>
If we check the conditions of all conditional dasas , we will see that Shodasottari dasa and Ashtottari  dasa apply. 
Though Jupiter is exalted, he is in gandanta. Mars is in a sama rasi, as per compound relationships. So neither is 
strong. So we use Vimsottari dasa. As Moon is debil itated and at the beginning of a sign, he is weak. We use 
lagna as the seed. 
As per Vimsottari dasa from lagna of D-4, Rahu maha dasa Venus antardasa gave the event. Rahu is the ka raka 
for living abroad and he is in the 12 th  house of displacement from motherland here. So his  dasa can take one 
abroad. Though Venus is lagna lord, he is in the 8 th  house and can show displacement or instability of residence. 
Moreover, from dasa lord Rahu, Venus is the 7 th  lord in 9 th  house. 
Example 27: Going Abroad 
Birthdata : 1975 July 13, 4:04:10 pm (IST), Eluru, India (81e06, 16n42) 
Event : She left his motherland India in 1997 August. 
D-4 (chaturthamsa) chart shows residence. D-4 of natal chart is shown below. 
If  we  check  the  conditions  of  all  conditional  dasas,  we  will  see  that  Shodasottari  dasa,  Ashtottari  dasa, 
Dwisaptati  sama  dasa  and  Shattrimsa  sama  dasa  apply .  Controlling  palnets  are  Jupiter,  Mars,  Rahu  and 
Mercury. Of these, exalted Mercury is the strongest. Though Moon is afflicted by Rahu, there is enough gap and 
exalted Moon is in the middle of a sign. We use Moon as the seed. 
As per Shasttrimsa sama dasa from Moon of D-4, Venu s mahadasa Rahu antardasa gave the event. Venus and  
Rahu are in the 7 th  house of long journey in a watery sign and Rahu is  the karaka for going abroad. Though 
Venus is lagna lord, he is in an inimical sign in t he 7 th  house and can show going abroad. Moreover, being t he 
dispositor of Ketu, Venus gives Ketu's results also , as Ketu has no dasa. Here, Ketu is the 7 th  lord in lagna and 
can show going abroad. 


<<<PAGE_32>>>
Example 28: Marriage 
Birthdata : 1975 July 13, 4:04:10 pm (IST), Eluru, India (81e06, 16n42) 
Event : She got married in 2001 February. 
D-9 (navamsa) chart shows marriage. D-9 of natal chart is shown below. 
If we check the conditions of all conditional dasas, we will see that Dwadasottari dasa and Shattrimsa sama dasa 
apply. Controlling palnets are Ketu and Mercury. Ne ither lone Ketu nor Mercury in a satru rasi is stro ng. So we 
fall back to Vimsottari dasa. If debilitated Moon w as in gandanta (i.e. in last 1/9 th  of Scrorpio), he would've 
been considered too weak. Here he is not in gandant a and has 100% aspect from friend Mars and 92% aspe ct 
from friend Jupiter. So we accept Moon as the seed of the dasa. 
Ashtottari dasa may seem to apply here, but Rahu at  5Vi10 is not really in a quadrant from lagna lord Saturn at 
28Ge36 – he is instead in the 3 rd  house. 
As per Vimsottari dasa from Moon of D-9, Venus maha dasa Saturn antardasa gave the event. Venus is the 
yogakaraka in the 7 th  house of marriage and an apt planet for giving mar riage. Saturn is lagna lord. Moreover, 
from dasa lord Venus, he is placed in the karaka st hana (12 th  house for Venus, as per pachakadi sambandhas). 
He is the naisargika karaka for Venus too. Hence this antardasa is an apt antardasa for giving wedding. 
Example 29: Marriage 
Birthdata : 1970 April 4, 5:50:40 pm (IST), Machilipatnam, India (81e08, 16n10) 
Event : He got married on 1993 August 1. 
D-9 (navamsa) chart shows marriage. D-9 of natal chart is shown below. 


<<<PAGE_33>>>
If we check the conditions of all conditional dasas , we will see that Shodasottari dasa, Ashtottari da sa and 
Shattrimsa sama dasa apply. Controlling palnets are  Jupiter, Mars and Mercury. Jupiter is debilitated and weak. 
Both Mars and Mercury are strong in adhimitra rasis . Both are alone (i.e. neither strengthened nor wea kened by 
conjunction). So let us consider aspects on them. T he strongest aspect on Mars is from Mercury (73% as pect). 
With Mercury being the 5 th  lord and functional benefic, this aspect is auspic ious. The strongest aspect on 
Mercury  is  from  Jupiter  (99%).  With  Jupiter  being  t he  8 th  lord  and  a  functional  malefic,  this  aspect  is 
inauspicious. So we declare Mars to be stronger and use Ashtottari dasa. 
As per Ashtottari dasa from Moon of D-9, Mars mahadasa Rahu antardasa gave the event. Mars is the 7 th  lord of 
marriage. Rahu is in the 11 th  house of fructification and aspects the 7 th  house. Moreover, he gives the results of 
the other 7 th  lord Ketu, as Ketu has no dasa under Ashtottari dasa scheme. 
Example 31: Career with changes (Swami Sivananda) 
Birthdata : 1887 September 8, 4:15:15 am (LMT, 5:11 east of GMT), 77e40, 8n48 
Events : He started his career as a physician in India. He  was quite successful in Malaysia during 1913-1923. He 
gave it all up in 1923 and became a monk in 1924. H e started a charitable dispensary in 1927. He estab lished 
“Divine Life Society” in January 1936. 
D-10 (dasamsa) chart shows work. D-10 of natal chart is shown below. 
If  we check  the conditions of all  conditional  dasas ,  we will see that only Dwisaptati sama dasa applie s. 
Controlling palnet is Rahu and he is in own sign. So we will use Dwisaptati sama dasa. 
Moon is debilitated and in gandanta. So we will use lagna as the seed. 
As per Dwisaptati sama dasa from lagna of D-10, his  career in India started in Rahu dasa. Rahu is lagn a lord in 
lagna and he gives a good beginning. 


<<<PAGE_34>>>
Sun dasa ran during 1913-1922. He managed a hospita l all by himself in this dasa. Sun is the 7 th  lord in the 2 nd 
house in an adhimitra rasi along with the 5 th  lord and in samasaptaka with 9 th  lord. He shows a lot of interactions 
and financial success in career. 
Moon being a debilitated planet in gandanta in the 10 th  house of career, his dasa brought a big change in career. 
He left his career as a physician. 
In Moon mahadasa Venus antardasa, he established a charitable dispensary. Moon aspects the 4 th  house of 
building/establishing something and Venus is its lo rd. Venus is also yogakaraka. Being in the 8 th  house, Venus 
antardasa  gave  him  hard  work.  He started  the  dispen sary  to  serve  sadhus  and  poor  and  put  his  medical 
knowledge to use. 
Mars is the 10 th  lord of work in the 5 th  house of fame. Mars mahadasa from (1931-1940)  bro ught him some 
fame (which continued into 5 th  lord Mercury's dasa during 1940-1949). In Mars mah adasa Venus angtardasa, he 
established “Divine Life Society”. Venus is the 4 th  lord of building things and Mars aspects him. Also , Mars is 
the 10 th  lord and Venus is the 9 th  lord. Their combination can give dharmik work. 
Example 32: Sudden Limelight and Spreading Dharma (Swami Vivekananda) 
Birthdata : 1863 January 12, 6:32:58 a (LMT, 5:54 east of GMT), Calcutta, India (88e30, 22n40) 
Events : He had trouble finding a job in mid-1880's. He li ved as a wandering monk during 1886-1893. He came 
to limelight with a famous speech at the parliament of religions on 1893 September 11 and had a successful tour 
of US and UK teaching Dharma. He established Ramakr ishna Mission in January 1897 and was busy putting 
the organization in place in 1897-1898. 
D-10 (dasamsa) chart shows work. D-10 of natal chart is shown below. 
If we check the conditions of all conditional dasas , we will see that only Panchottari dasa applies. C ontrolling 
palnet is Venus and he is exalted. So we will use Panchottari dasa. 


<<<PAGE_35>>>
Though Moon is in own sign, he is within a degree f rom Rahu and hence weak. So we will use lagna as th e 
seed. 
As per Panchottari dasa from lagna of D-10, Saturn mahadasa was running when he had trouble finding a job. 
Saturn is a functional malefic in the 2 nd  house of money in a neutral sig and not well-placed. 
Mars mahadasa started in 1886 October. Mars is the 9 th  lord. He lived as a wandering monk discussing dhar ma 
with many people – scholars and laymen, kings and c ommoners. 
Mars mahadasa Jupiter antardasa started on 1893 August 31. Mars is the yogakaraka and aspecting the 5 th  house 
of fame. Jupiter is the 5 th  lord. So that antardasa brought him sudden limelig ht. With antardasa lord Jupiter 
being the 8 th  lord too, it was sudden. 
With Mars, Jupiter and Sun being trine lords, Mars- Jupiter and Mars-Sun antardasas gave him fortune an d were 
great for spreading dharma. 
In Mars mahadasa Sun antardasa, he established Ramakrishna Mission. With yogakaraka Mars being the 4 th  lord 
and Sun aspecting the 4 th  house, this antardasa is conducive to establishing  or building an organization. Sun in 
the 10 th  house gives administrative work. During 1897, he d id have to manage the construction work and also 
put in place an organization. 
Conclusion 
A methodology deduced from Parasara's teachings, fo r picking one  dasa in any chart from among Vimsottari 
dasa and nine conditional nakshatra dasas, is proposed in this write-up. This methodology seems to work well in 
natal charts as well as annual Tithi Pravesha charts, and also in all divisional charts. 


<<<PAGE_36>>>
It is hoped that intelligent and sincere students a nd researchers of this divine subject will take thi s knowledge 
further and contribute to a renaissance in Jyotish and other knowledge related to rishis. 
::Om Shaantih Shaantih Shaantih:: 